Design Review (DR)
==========

Purpose
-------
A design review (DR) is a milestone within the development process,
whereby a *design* is evaluated against the project’s *requirements*, in
order to verify the suggested model / product will meet the
requirements, and that it will do so in the best possible way (sometimes
including adjustments to the requirements if they can’t be met for
various reasons).

The design review also allows the designer / design team to receive
important feedback from other project stakeholders, which until now
weren’t necessarily heard.

Timing
-------
The design review is part of the project’s *design* phase (including
also High-Level Design and Detailed Design), and should take place after
the *requirement collection* and *data exploration* phases, and before
the *development* phase.

Types
-------
We usually hold two types of design reviews:

An *external* design review, including all the project stakeholders –
management, business, product, other related development teams,
infrastructure, QA etc.

An *internal* design review, including only the development team (the
designer / design team presenting the model to the other team members).

The order of performing the reviews can vary: we can perform the
internal review before the external one, as a preparation session. Or we
can perform the external one first, and then have the internal one
discuss and finalize all the issues that were raised on the external
one.

Content
-------
In general, the design review should present the suggested model /
product – it’s components, interfaces and logic – and describe how it
will support the business requirements.

The *external* design review should be more business-oriented, using
terms and explanations that also non-technical people will understand
(focus on the ‘**What**’).

The *internal* design review will be more detailed and technical, diving
into the bits-and-bytes (focus on the ‘**How**’).

The design review session should contain:

-   A short overview of the model / product purpose and the
    general requirements.

-   Description and explanation of the suggested model / product design
    (it is highly recommended to prepare visual aids, such as ERDs, flow
    charts, UI mockups, alternative comparisons, example
    use-cases etc.).

-   Open issues / questions for the participants.

Outcomes
-------
The design review should result in a general Go/No-Go decision regarding
the suggested design (continue to the development phase or not), and a
list of detailed issues that need further investigation and adjustment,
in order to arrive to the final design.

If many changes and adjustments are required, it is recommended to
schedule another design review, to present the updated model / product
design and make sure it is acceptable.

Tips
-------
-   The design review should not be longer than 1.5 hours (if more time
    is needed, break it into a few sessions).

-   Have someone that will take notes, which is not the presenter (and
    if you use the white-board during the meeting – take a photo).

-   Remember – the design review will never go exactly as you planned!

    Allow participants to express themselves and share their thoughts
    (this is what the design review is for), but when the discussion is
    carried completely off-track or gets into unimportant details – get
    the discussion back on-track (and schedule follow-up meetings to
    discuss the raised issues, if needed).

-   Write and send a Meeting Summary as soon as possible – it will
    assist in ordering your thoughts (and list the needed actions), and
    will allow the participants to comment and correct you, it you
    didn’t completely understand their intensions during the meeting.


